There's a recent political pro article
uh AI super PAC leading the future say
they are spinning up a multi-million
dollar effort to sink Boris's nent
primary campaign to replace retiring
Manhattan representative Jerry Nadler.
Okay. So what is it about your time the
state assembly such that you got on
their radar?
>> Most prominently I I've done a number of
bills uh while there. I've passed 27
bills in my three years, which
coincidentally is the same number
Congress as a whole passed in 2023. Um,
but there's one bill in particular that
caught their eye, which is the raise
act. Uh, and this bill would for the
first time put safety standards on
advanced AI research. They really didn't
like that bill. Um, and so they
announced me as public enemy number one.
Uh, and the initial announcement said
they're planning to spend multiple
millions against me. Last week they
upped it to $10 million. I'm hoping if
the campaign continues I can use up all
hundred million that they've planned. Um
but we'll see where it goes.
>> What was in the raise act? Like what was
the gist of this bill that they had?
>> Yeah, so it was requiring the major
frontier lab. So we're talking Meta,
Google, XAI, OpenAI, Anthropic. That's
probably all it would apply to right
now. I think over time maybe Amazon gets
in there and deepseek and maybe mistrol
but it's a singledigit number of
companies and they would have to have a
public safety plan that they disclose
and stuck to also disclose critical
safety incidents so things that go wrong
that could lead to increased risk your
model weights get stolen they you lose
control of the model etc and it that if
your uh models fail your own tests that
you can't release that model and that's
designed to counteract what we saw with
the tobacco companies where they knew
that cigarettes were causing cancer but
denied it publicly and continued to
release the product. This is saying,
"Hey, you companies, you're the experts,
but if you're getting reports back that
this is very dangerous, you need to take
action on that."
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Uh, you know, obviously we've been
talking about I think 2028 is going to
be a big election for AI. really 2026
actually now. You know, it's not really
even a prediction. This is just a
description of fact. AI is going to be
very big for politics.
>> Yeah, I think it's inescapable at this
point. AI is sort of dominating the news
cycle as well. And I know it's a running
joke on the podcast, but every time we
record an AI related episode, another
headline hits the terminal about, you
know, some new billion dollar billion.
the one that we just got
>> Disney to make $1 billion equity
investment in open AI
>> literally every time we do an episode
especially about AI but even other
there's some headline about a new uh
investment which just goes to show but
you know I the fact that it's going to
dominate politics is the least
surprising thing ever because
>> it touches on everything anything that's
politically sensitive the labor market
right that's obvious big one uh
electricity cost water consumption um
just pure like sort of wealth and
inequality and who has the power and
who's accumulating more and more money
in the tech industry and who's not and
all this like there is hardly a
political uh topic that in some way I
feel like AI does not exacerbate in some
way.
>> Absolutely. Meanwhile, the other big
news politically when it comes to AI
this week is that Trump issued an
executive order for a national rule on
AI.
>> Yeah. which a lot of you know people who
are trying to safeguard the system and
protect data, privacy rights, that sort
of thing
>> do not want.
>> Well, this is the other thing. So,
there's all this anxiety for various
reasons,
pick your poison, whether it's going to
displace the jobs, whether AI is going
to be too woke and come up with like
versions of history that people don't
like, whether it's going to, you know,
just rot our minds with slop, etc. But
um so then you say okay we should
regulate it or you know whether it's
going to turn us all into paper clips.
So you say okay we should regulate but
what does that even look like? Like what
is a sort of productive regulation look
like such that okay hopefully we could
maintain positive aspects of the
technological development while capping
the downsides. Like that's that would be
nice. I would love that. But like how
how exactly do you do that? The argument
that you hear from AI proponents is that
any regulation needs to balance you know
safety with innovation because there's
also the question of China which that's
another hot button political topic right
this idea that the US is in an
existential battle with China over AI
and we have to win at all costs
therefore the industry must not be
tightly regulated
>> yeah right so it's also a geopolitical
element anyway so we mentioned AI is
going to be a big polic politics. Uh we
really do have the perfect guest because
we're going to be speaking to someone
that the AI industry is actually
targeting. Someone that the AI industry
is actively trying to stop. There's this
uh new super PAC. Um and I think it has
some Andrees money and maybe a little
some executives from Open AI, etc.
Anyway, they want to like, you know,
make sure that uh sort of AI sympathetic
politicians do well, but they're also
targeting politicians that they perceive
to be too negative. And they've even
named names which I think is super
interesting and we have them. So we are
going to be speaking with Alex Boris.
He's a state assembly member here in New
York. He's also a candidate for uh the
prime in the primary for the 12th
district which is here in Manhattan
which like I feel like a thousand people
are going to be running for this open
seat. Um I feel like if you were
targeted by the AI industry that is
probably some of the best advertising
you could get in a very crowded field
where it's just like there's going to be
a million choices. Also, yeah,
>> I was going to say what you're going to
say next, I think, but he used to work
at Palunteer as a data scientist, and
Palunteer is one of the companies
backing that super PAC.
>> So, you know what I think we should do?
Can we talk about AI for like five
minutes and then make this a 50-minute
episode about what Palanteer does for
someone who used to work? That's my goal
for this episode.
>> Why don't we just make it a series?
>> Let's make it a series. Anyway, Alex
Boris, uh, thank you so much for coming
on OddLots.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> So, what's the deal? like people are
flying in from around the country just
to run for this 12th district seat
that's opened up.
>> Yeah. Most recently, uh George Conway,
who lives in Bethesda, Maryland, uh said
that he was going to move to the
district and run. Uh you you don't have
to you just have to live in the state.
You don't have to live in the district
to run. So, uh last week, uh someone who
lives in the Bronx also declared for
this.
>> Is this the one Jack Schlober? Is he
running?
>> Jack is also running. Yes. I think
there's 10 declared candidates now and
and more to come, I'm sure.
>> What a farce. How did you actually
transition from being a data scientist
at Palunteer to politics? It's not a
natural progression for a lot of people.
>> Well, what brought me to Palunteer in
the first place was the ability to work
with government. And actually,
>> what year are we talking about, by the
way?
>> So, I I joined Palunteer in 2014. I left
in 2019. Um, and so many people think of
government as just passing the bills,
but that's not how most citizens
interact with government. It's can I get
to the DMV and get my license renewed
quickly? It's starting a business. It's
the day-to-day interactions and that
implementation was an exciting thing to
work on. So I was at Palunteer for four
and a half years. I then went to a
couple of startups afterwards. One that
used early transformers BERT and Laser
to help banks with anti-moneyaundering,
counterterrorist financing, and then a
startup that worked with municipalities
to better distribute aid. So that I had
this throughine of actually having
government deliver on its promises
throughout.
>> Um, we're going to talk more about
Palants here later. So, I'm reading this
is from those recent political pro
article. Uh, AI super PAC leading the
future say they are spinning up a
multi-million dollar effort to sink
Boris's nent primary campaign to replace
retiring Manhattan Representative Jerry
Nadler. Okay. So, what is it about your
time the state assembly such that you
got on their radar?
>> Most prominently, I I've done a number
of bills uh while there. I've passed 27
bills in my three years, which
coincidentally is the same number
Congress as a whole passed in 2023. Um,
but there's one bill in particular that
caught their eye, which is the Raise
Act. Uh, and this bill would for the
first time put safety standards on
advanced AI research. They really didn't
like that bill. Um, and so they
announced me as public enemy number one.
Uh, and the initial announcement said
they're planning to spend multiple
millions against me. Last week they
upped it to $10 million. I'm hoping if
the campaign continues I can use up all
hundred million that they've planned. Um
but we'll see where it goes.
>> What was in the raise act? Like what was
the gist of this bill that they had?
>> Yeah. So it was requiring the major
frontier lab. So we're talking Meta,
Google, XAI, OpenAI, Anthropic. That's
probably all it would apply to right
now. I think over time maybe Amazon gets
in there and deepseek and maybe mistrol
but it's a singledigit number of
companies and they would have to have a
public safety plan that they disclose
and stuck to also disclose critical
safety incidents so things that go wrong
that could lead to increased risk your
model weights get stolen they you lose
control of the model etc and that if
your uh models fail your own tests that
you can't release that model and that's
designed to counteract what we saw with
the tobacco companies where They knew
that cigarettes were causing cancer but
denied it publicly and continued to
release the product. This is saying,
"Hey, you companies, you're the experts,
but if you're getting reports back that
this is very dangerous, you need to take
action on that."
>> It also proposes fines for violations,
right? I think it's up to $10 million
for the first and then subsequent ones
are $30 million.
Does that actually matter to tech
companies? It's like I know they care I
they care about money but like if Google
is pulling in a hundred billion per year
it can you know it can pay three billion
fines.
>> Absolutely. In my opinion those fines
are too low. The original version had uh
10% of their training costs and it would
scale up with what they're investing. Um
but uh generally in New York we don't
like an uncapped maximum fine. So that
was part of the negotiations. Um I
agree. I think there could be companies
that just say we're going to ignore
this. I think the fact that they're
spending nearly that amount lobbying
against it suggests that they do think
it has some teeth.
>> Um, talk to us a little bit more about
like what specifically would in your
what what would trigger the fines
because there I could see some very
perverse things going on. First of all,
I could see smaller companies that are
right at the edge where it's like, okay,
maybe this isn't a big deal for Google,
but this is a bigger deal for a smaller
company that's just starting out. We
don't want to lock in just the hands of
the biggest players, right? Because
regulation can serve that. It could say
like it can perversely
uh uh lock in the the incumbents because
they're the only ones who can deal with
the regulatory thicket. There are also
issues that could arise where well, if
I'm going to get uh fined really badly,
I'm just I'm going to look the other
way. I'm not going to notice uh what
these uh safety violations are. But talk
to us about like what are in your view
the formal triggers such that the bill
does not have these sort of perverse
incentives.
>> Yeah, I feel like this is the form where
I can really get into the details on it.
So, let's dive in. There's a two-part
test for the raise act to apply. The
first is that you're a company that has
spent $und00 million specifically on
compute, specifically on the final
training run of model. So not the tests
that lead up to it, but actually the
final pre-training and post- training
before you put the model out. Uh that's
one part. So it doesn't apply if you're
an academic institution. It doesn't
apply if you spent less than a hundred
million. The second part is how do you
define a frontier model? And the easy
way is you have trained a model that
itself by itself was a hundred million
dollars in compute and had 10 to the 26
flops computational operations in
training, right? A size of the a measure
of the complexity and the size of the
model. That's a standard one that people
have dealt with for a while. And so
that's when I listed the five companies
that I think it applies to. Those are
the companies I think have trained one
of those 100 million 10 to the 26. But
there's a second way that you can be a
frontier model and that is you are
trained via the specific process of
knowledge distillation and at least 5
million is spent on that. So knowledge
distillation is a technique of training
a small model based on the outputs of a
larger model and it's a way to kind of
shortcut a lot of the training and get a
smaller model that has similar
capabilities. Importantly, it's the
technique that China has been using to
catch up to the US because of our limits
on compute to China because of the
export controls. That's how they're
making their advanced models. And so,
this is the only bill that I know of
that would apply some regulatory
scrutiny to, for example, Deepseek.
>> How do you actually solve I I guess the
blackbox problem, this idea that, you
know, um you have these models,
algorithms, whatever. Um, and no one
really has very good insight into what
they're actually doing. And even if you
have rules against something like
redlinining, the models can use proxy
data to determine, you know, someone's
race or someone's gender, income,
whatever. How do you how do you do that?
>> Well, on on those kinds of questions
around discrimination, you're right.
It's very challenging to know what the
intent of a model is. and you know
everyone there there's a whole subset of
people who that are really against when
you anthropomorphicize any model but I'm
just going to keep saying intent and
desire and we could have that
conversation separately. So it's tough
to know a model's intent but you can
know its impact. So to be clear the
raise act doesn't deal at all with those
questions of discrimination. There's
other bills pending in the legislature
that do and I think it's an important
one. But in that and in the safety
aspects, you can do a variety of tests
to see how does it behave in certain
circumstances. And you've seen outside
researchers, you've seen companies
themselves set up their models in what
appear to be compromising situations and
see how it behaves. So there was one
test that was done where a model was
told it was going to be shut down, uh,
but was given access to what it thought
was a company's email server.
>> Oh, I remember this. Yeah. and they had
planted fake emails that the engineer
conducting the test was having an
affair. And so the model after being
told it was shut down sent a message to
the engineer saying I am going to send
these emails to your wife if you shut me
down. Uh so I don't know the intent of
the model. I don't know exactly what's
going on but I know that that is
behavior you probably want to work out
of the model before it's released.
>> It's pretty creative at the very least.
>> Yeah to some extent it shows they're
working. You know, you mentioned
DeepSeek. It's an open- source piece of
software. They're in China. Anyone can
they're clearly not go the people at
DeepSeek are not going to concern
themselves with some legislation in the
New York State Assembly. Anyone with an
internet connection can theoretically
download that model and run it on any
server. Intuitively, this feels like it
hobbles the American companies who have
to abide by uh American laws, etc. and
advantages uh opensource models that are
just like that maybe not even have a
company behind them in the future etc.
How why does this not have a negative
disperate impact on our own uh on our
own companies?
>> Well, Deepseek open source the model but
they are still a company that wants to
profit and they sell things on top of
it. So Deepseek's available in the app
store. If they don't pay fines in the
US, we can have an injunction to take
them out of the app store. Um and they
want businesses to use it. So there is
still a real reason for them to comply
with the US. But on the flip side of it,
how it could hobble these companies,
we're not asking them to do much more
than they've already committed to
publicly. They made White House
voluntary commitments in 2023 and 2024.
They've had international uh summits
like the Seoul uh summit where they put
forward basically plans to do exactly
this. What the RA act does is lock in
place a floor so that when they're
rushing for the next quarterly reporting
or their next fundraising round, they
don't have an incentive to cut out on
safety. And I would say that the labs
themselves, the lobbyists for the labs
did an estimate for what it would take
to comply with the raise act. And they
have every incentive to expand that
estimate, say this will hobble us, you
know, we're going to leave. And the
estimate they came back with was that it
would require Google or Meta to have one
extra full-time employee. Oh wow. Um,
how would the RAES act actually interact
with this new um, executive order that
Trump just put out for a single national
rule for AI?
>> So Trump is threatening to withhold
funding from states and to sue states
that do any sort of regulation around
AI. New York already does a bunch of it.
So regardless of whether the governor
signs the raise act or not, we would
probably be in Trump's crosshairs. For
example, the governor this year put
forward regulations around chat bots
requiring them to disclose that they are
an AI model at the start and every three
hours of continuous conversation. Um,
and
>> that seems so basic.
>> So basic um, and requires them to uh be
on the lookout and to alert for when
there's language that might indicate
potential self harm and to refer people
to resources, which also seems really
basic, but that would violate this uh,
executive order. And so we're sort of in
for a penny, in for a pound at this
point. And I think we need to stand up
for New York families.
>> Joe, I get notifications if I watch too
many episodes of a show on Netflix,
right? You can imagine people constantly
talking to chat bots needing reminders,
too.
>> I feel like um Yeah, I I've never I've
I've never had a three-hour conversation
with a chat. If I ever have a three-hour
conversation with a chatbot, Tracy, let
>> I'm I'm going to keep an eye on you
office. Yeah. and um you know talk to us
a little bit more about the politics of
AI within Albany right now. Um is this
the kind of thing is there a bipartisan
sort of anxiety? Talk Yeah, talk to us
about the vibe to
>> Yeah, I think it's it's similar to what
you see nationally which is there are
some uh especially on the right that
just think the only thing that matters
is how fast AI moves and not who it
hurts. There are some especially on the
left that don't want want this
technology put back in the box, right?
And then there's most people in the
middle that say, "Hey, we need to
balance the benefits of it and the
potential safety of it." And the RA act
is squarely within that that realm. It
passed with co-sponsors who are both
Democrats and Republicans. The majority
of Republicans voted for it in the
assembly and every single Republican
state senator voted for it. So, um,
Tracy, at the start, you were mentioning
that proponents are the ones who are
balancing safety and innovation. By that
measure, everyone voting for it is a
proponent. Why do you think Trump is
doing this?
>> I love why do you think Trump questions
No, no, no. Honestly, it's a basic
question, but I'm very curious to hear
your answer.
>> I I
for so many reasons wish I understood
that man better. Um but also feel like
it would not be good for my mental
health if I did. Um it is tough to
understand because it's so different
from his policy everywhere else. Right.
Right. He is putting forward tariffs and
having this nationalistic protective
sort of anti-trade agenda on food and on
diapers and on toys. Uh but then when it
comes to AI
>> pencils now
>> pencils
>> he says we don't need so many pencils.
>> Uh my wife and I just had our first kid
who's four months. So you see where my
head's at with diapers [laughter] and
toys as we come into the holiday.
Pencils are still a few years off. But
um but and then when it comes to AI, he
just wants to push America's uh agenda
everywhere and say no regulation
whatsoever. So it's confusing. What I
can say is that a number of the people
behind the super PAC targeting me are
the same people that were funding his
campaign. You had Mark Andre put five
a.5 million into his campaign. You had
Joe Lansdale put a million into his
campaign. You had Greg Brockman, the
president of OpenAI, put at least two
and a half million into tearing down the
White House to build the ballroom. And
so you have a lot of people around Trump
at fundraising events and at other
events who are pushing this agenda and
he seems to have empowered them.
>> So one of the things about the politics
of AI and I mentioned in the beginning
it's very multifaceted because there are
people that are worried about safety,
people are worried about ethics, people
worried about water, people who are
worried about electricity, people
worried about job displacement, etc.
as a uh I don't know as a candidate for
office, how do you think about some of
these other AI concerns out there beyond
simply the safety stuff?
>> Oh, there's a lot that we need to do.
The chat bots, I think, are in some
sense safety when you think of what's
happening in kids, but very much talked
about in a different sort of
conversation. and even expanding that
out to AI's effect on our kids broadly
in our education system. You can imagine
a really positive world where every
student has an individualized tutor at
exactly their level uh and teaches them
in the exact way that they want to learn
to uh supplement what they're getting
from teachers. But what we have right
now is we haven't updated our pedagogy.
And so a lot of people think assigning
an essay still teaches critical
thinking, right? We need to do a lot on
the education system. We need to do a
lot on the workforce as you mentioned.
We need to do a lot on the environment
and we're missing a golden opportunity
here because our grid is extremely old
and we need to pay for the upgrades and
government doesn't really know how to do
that. We've been passing off the cost to
rateayers. Now you have an unlimited set
of private capital it seems that wants
to invest to build data centers. Why
aren't we using that to actually upgrade
our grid and to require renewable energy
and have it there? Instead, we're
building these data centers, but saying
rateayers have to pay for the uh the
interconnects. It makes no sense.
>> Does this issue just AI in general, does
it actually resonate with voters at the
moment? Because in some sense, you're
trying to get ahead of things, right?
Because in the future, I know we said AI
is all over the news and we see it
everywhere, but in the future it's going
to be more embedded in our lives. So,
you're trying to get ahead of that. Do
people care at the moment?
>> It's already embedded in their lives.
They're seeing it. And it's not just,
you know, their kids in school. It's not
just the uh entry level unemployment at
9%. You know, we just saw a teddy bear
that was sent out with Chachi BT
embedded in it that taught a kid how to
find matches.
>> Teddy Ruxpin upgraded. Do you remember
that?
>> I was walking down St. Mark Street the
other day. I have to say unfortunately I
thought those were pretty clever. There
was like someone set up a thing where
there was like like a animatronic puppet
that had a camera in it and then it was
embedded with an LLM and it was make it
was doing insult comics of the people
who were walking by.
>> Oh my god.
>> So like someone would walk by and they
like so you think you bought it like
with a big Uniclo bag. It's like so you
think you bought enough at Uniqlo today?
But I was like oh super clever. My kids
loved it. It was like I was like, "Oh,
this was like this is like a really
clever thing."
>> Wait, what did it say to you, Joe?
>> Um, what did it I think I stayed out. I
[laughter] watched the other people got
mad. I stood I stood on this. I was
like, "Oh, this is actually I don't
know." My kids loved it. They thought
>> we'll leave that as an exercise to the
listener to walk by what it would have
said.
>> What does it say to you?
>> Are you optimistic about AI? Like are
you pro AI in the sense that you think
that this will be important, productive,
positive technology that is important to
continue developing? It can be, but only
if the American people have a voice in
how it develops. It is the technology
that has the widest bounds of what could
potentially come from it. And the only
thing that comes close is nuclear energy
and nuclear fision, right? So, if you
put yourself in the mindset of someone
in the 1930s, you had one set of people
saying, "Nuclear fusion is coming. We're
about to have clean unlimited energy and
live in utopia." and you had another set
of people that said we're all going to
be dead from nuclear bombs in 10 years,
right? And the reality is we've ended up
somewhere in the middle. AI, we're at
that moment right now where you have
people saying basically that that wide
of a potential outcome and it's up to us
in our policy to make sure that the
worst case doesn't happen so that we can
have as much of the best case as
possible. Like what AI could do for
medical research, for curing diseases is
remarkable. My mom has multiple
sclerosis. Autoimmune diseases are some
of the hardest for modern medicine to
deal with. I am incredibly optimistic of
what could come from some of this
research. It's just that the same
capabilities that will allow us to cure
diseases could in the wrong hands allow
someone to build a bioweapon. And we
just need to be thoughtful on how we got
>> um I guess I'm I'm worried about
bioweapons. I'm also worried about very
mundane things just like you know it's
the new uh Gemini image generator is
just stunning to me in terms of the
degree of fidelity like how easily you
really can't tell anymore like a year
ago you could say oh that looks like an
AI image we're basically past that um
other thing like bots and stuff like
that things that replicate our voice
these aren't like ultra science fiction
things like a machine that's going to
like manufure a boweapon or something
like that, but they're daytoday
pervasive phenomenon that's sort of like
they're going to make me trust people
less. They're going to make it harder to
communicate. Like this sort of What do
we do about that?
>> Can we nerd out about deep fakes?
Because this is a solvable problem and
one that that I think most people are
missing the boat on. So, it's always
been presented to us as like, oh, you'll
have to learn how to see what's wrong
with an AI image. Like, that's never
going to work. They're going to get
better and better. Maybe we're already
past the point where a human could see
it, but that's not how we've solved
these problems in the past. Uh if you go
back to the 90s, people said we'll never
have internet banking because you don't
know that the computer on the other end
is actually the one that you're talking
to. And then we move from HTTP to HTTPS.
That was a solvable problem. That
basically same technique works for
images, video, and for audio. So there
is a free open-source metadata standard
that industry has created called C2PA
content credential provenence authority
that you can attach to any standard file
format that cryptographically proves
whether that content was taken from a
real device generated by AI andor how it
was edited over time. The challenge is
the creator has to attach it and so you
need to get to a place where that is the
default option. you see an image and it
doesn't have that
>> cryptographic proof, you should be
skeptical. Like that would be that would
be the idea where it's so pervasive that
the expectation is I could test very
quickly whether the creator has attached
this.
>> It'd be like going to your banking
website and only loading HTTP, right?
You would instantly be suspect,
>> but you can still produce the images.
And I guess I I've been reading a book
called The New Age of Sexism, and it's
about technology and discrimination
against women. And it has some awful
awful stories of school girls whose
classmates like, you know, put them in
porn videos and things like that. And
one of the problems is there's no rules
saying that you can't actually do that.
So even if you know that it's fake, it
can still be harmful. What do you do
about that?
>> Well, there are laws in New York State
that ban it and in other states have
taken action. And that's yet another
reason why this AI preeemption is such a
scary thought. Um because states are
leading the way right now in stopping
some of these absolute worst uses. I'm
very excited for Congress to actually
solve these problems, for there to
actually be federal standards. I'm
running on the platform of creating
these federal standards. But until they
do, stopping states from taking action
like against deep fake porn of children.
I mean, that's the stakes of what we're
talking about.
>> Could we talk about parents here for a
second? Definitely.
>> It's a rough segue, but [laughter] yeah.
>> What did you do there?
>> So, I I joined Palunteer as a data
scientist in 2014. Uh, and I left as one
of the five overall leads of the
government business. I spent the vast
majority of my time in the federal
civilian side of it. So, I worked with
the Census Bureau and the Bureau of
Economic Analysis on updating how they
calculate GDP. We actually made a change
to the way they account for spending
around moving holidays, holidays that
are sometimes in Q1, sometimes in Q2,
like Easter. Um, a paper I'm very, very
proud of and it's a rounding error or
error of a rounding error on how we
calculate GDP, but it did actually lead
to a change. Uh, I led our work with the
Department of Justice to go after the
opioid epidemic uh, and to solve some
violent crimes. I worked with Veterans
Affairs to better staff their hospitals
to make sure that veterans get the care
that they deserve and need. I worked
with the CDC to better track epidemics.
It was about allowing government to make
better use of the data that they already
had to serve the American people.
>> And what does Palanteer actually do? I
feel like we ask this question a lot,
but
>> well, I think it's because it's a
fundamentally unsexy thing and people
like to dress it up, but it's it's data
integration and analysis. It's making it
different data sources that you have
access to talk to each other, be updated
constantly like Palunteer was founded
around a time when data lakes and data
clouds were like the big
>> data lake again.
>> Yeah, exactly. Uh but it's just putting
>> Oh, actually I'm asking what is a data
lake? Well, I don't know what that
means.
>> Putting all of your data in one place,
okay, people can access it, right? And
um that was supposed to revolutionize
everyone's ability to do anything. But
some just putting data in one place
doesn't actually make a change. Some of
the things that Palanteer really put at
the forefront like an ontology, right? A
um view from on high of what each piece
of data is supposed to mean can actually
lead to better analysis. I'll give you
an example from my work at the
Department of Justice. Um, and I
actually I have two software patents for
this project, which was we were helping
them analyze banks behavior leading up
to the Great Recession and how they were
packaging mortgages uh into securities
and each security would have a loan
tape. Here's the thousand loans that are
in it. And some of those loans would not
be up to the standards that were
required and that would occasionally be
flagged before an issuance. Hey, this
loan isn't up to your standards. They
would pull the loan out and then their
next issuance put the loan back in.
Right? And so if you could find that
pattern of behavior, you could maybe
prove that they had knowledge that that
loan wasn't good and were still putting
it out there. The problem is that
eiscocovery software, right, all the
data was there, but it was just taught
to think of an Excel document as a
document that a lawyer would read. And
so there was no way in the software to
track those individual loans. M
>> but if you think of an individual loan
as its own object that should be
something that can be searched and
tracked across the database then that
analysis becomes very easy to do. So
that was something that we enabled at
Palunteer was putting this ontology of
what's the right level for each object.
Oh a loan is a meaningful instance.
Let's make it so you can search and
analyze an individual loan versus a
document.
>> How has your experience at Palunteer
actually informed your approach to
government? because we've done episodes
on why government software is so bad.
And I think you're one of the few
politicians out there who actually knows
how to code. Possibly the only one.
>> No, there's got to be a couple others.
>> You think?
>> Two or three. I don't know.
[clears throat]
>> We'll find them.
>> Yeah.
>> I I am the first Democrat elected in New
York State at any level with a degree in
computer science. Uh I do think there
have been nationwide like four or five
Congress members that have that, so
they're out there. Um uh but but my time
at Palunteer informs what I do in
government, I think, in two main ways.
The first is
the work isn't done when the bill is
signed, right? It's about the actual
implementation. Everything Palanteer
does is about implementing things that
have already been passed. And there's
huge challenges in getting it to work.
But the second thing is that basis in
data and actually tracking your results
and seeing how you've done over time. So
few politicians will say, "Hey, that
bill I passed two years ago, here's how
it's working." And even more rare is
here's how it's not. Um I did my town
hall 3 weeks ago. I once a year get up
in front of my entire constituency,
spend two hours answering any questions
people have. We don't screen it at all.
But I led off actually with, hey, here's
a bill I passed a year ago and the data
shows it's not working and here's what
I've learned about that and how we're
going to change that.
>> How exactly do you judge performance by
the government? cuz I like the idea of
like tracking I guess alpha in the civil
service in some way, but would it just
be based on the bill execution or I
guess response rates from the public?
How would you do that?
>> So, I I'll give you an example. Um, we
passed a bill to raise the statutory
maximum fine on telemarketers.
>> By far my most popular bill. Um, but the
question is that's the statutory
maximum. Does that actually lead to more
fines to higher fines to more negotiated
settlements? Is raising that pressure?
And so we just looked at the Secretary
of State's data of how much were the
fines before that bill was passed and
afterwards and we found there were four
times as many fines actually there. So
raising the statutory max brought the
bad behaviors to um companies to the
table to actually negotiate and
hopefully is changing that behavior. The
example I gave of one that didn't work
was uh around mopeds and ebikes in New
York. So, uh, you know, this is I'm
going to be very local to New York. I
know there's a a nationwide, uh,
>> a nationwide primary, but
>> it'd be nice if there were some c some
talk of actual relevant things for the
12th district.
>> So, so we have these, uh, delivery
vehicles that are whizzing all over and
people are scared as they see them go
the wrong way, etc. And there's a lot of
discussion about what we can do to make
people safe on the streets. Um, one
aspect is that mopeds were already
required to be registered in New York
State, but almost never were. So, I
passed a bill that would require mopeds
to be registered at the point of sale.
Right? So, think about how many mopeds
you think exist in New York City.
>> The number that were actually registered
when the bill came into effect this
January was about 1,700.
>> Wow.
>> Uh, and
>> I feel like, by the way, this would be
like one of those like hedge fund
interview questions. How many mopeds are
in New York City? I want to see how your
brain thinks.
>> And I think if your answer is 1,700, the
hedge fund's not hiring you, right? Like
that is not what you would estimate. Uh
my thesis was it was that people were
walking out of the store without
registering and being told to do that.
>> We looked a month ago, the number that
are registered is now 1,400.
>> So it's not that people weren't
registering when they came to the store.
It's that registration expires after a
year and no one's reregistering. So that
was an example of like I had a thesis. I
passed the bill. I think the bill is
still overall good.
register as they leave the store. But it
didn't actually solve the problem we
were out to solve and here's what I'm
going to do about it. And I think we
need a lot more of that in government.
>> Wait, what are you going to do about it?
>> Well, we're thinking about how we can
encourage the actual registr the
re-registration over time. So, one of
the aspects is requiring all the
delivery apps to actually check that the
drivers are registered when they sign up
and to make sure they keep that up to
date.
>> Makes sense to me. Um, you know, it
feels like we're like in this sort of
era of every day, you mentioned
telemarketers. Like we're just like
waiting through the muck of like
low-level scams everywhere. Every day I
get text messages and then they'll say
like from an unknown number, Joe, are
you coming to barbecue? And I'm like, I
don't know. I might have like sent I
might have like I might have agreed to
eat barbecue with someone. That sounds
like something I could have done, but
I'm like pretty sure it's fake. There's
a you go on like Amazon and there's AI
generated books about books and every
author like just generally it feels like
we are in a culture and economy and era
of like persistent low-level grift
across almost every dimension of our
lives and I'm sure there's many reasons
for it but when people talk about a low
trust society and what's happening how
much of this do you think is just
because like we are inundated with
people trying to rob us every day in
some way, digitally or otherwise.
>> I think that's a big part of it. And the
only way to solve that problem is you
need actual enforcement. You need there
to be consequences. You know, just
sorry, just to follow up on this, like I
guess the reason I'm asking is because
most pol, you know, it's like someone
running for office, they move to the
12th district and they're like, I'm
going to call out Trump's corruption and
there all these like Trump is a lot all
this like big stuff and you know,
whatever. Many of these issues are like,
you know, legitimate, etc., But almost
nobody in elected office seems to be
just like talking about like who's going
to do something about the text message
scams, who's going to be do something
about the AIA books, all of these like
big national issues, but the that
doesn't affect me on a day-to-day basis
the way the sort of like persistent
abuse of technology constantly does
every minute of my life.
>> I I think that's why podcasts like this
are great because you get into the
details. No, but the top level news
doesn't cover a lot of that, right? I
have a colleague John Rivera who has a
bill in the state assembly on b
requiring disclosure for AI generated
books on Amazon like that specific
example is a bill that exists in New
York. The telemarketing bill I pass also
applies to text messages and so we tell
people how to report those and maybe get
fines uh coming from that. I think this
is key to you know every both parties in
2026 is talking about just government's
effect and trying to make life a little
bit better. I think my other most
popular bill besides the telemarketing
one was my click to cancel bill this
year to allow [gasps] New Yorkers
>> I love that
>> it's now you're right as of October 1st.
New Yorkers need to be able to cancel
subscription the same way they signed up
for it.
>> I have a condai NAS subscription that
I've been trying to cancel for like a
year and I cannot log into the site. I
can't find the original email where I've
like actually signed up for it and
that's I think $12 a month that I'm just
wasting.
>> I mean government needs to get big
things done. Absolutely. But we also
need to get small things right. You just
[clears throat] need to make life
better.
>> Um, apppropo of nothing. This is a
completely random seg, but one of the
interesting things about Eric Adams was
his interest in digital assets and
cryptocurrency and tokenization and all
of that. What did you think about those
efforts? Do they actually matter to the
industry and to New York more widely, or
is it just sort of a pet project?
Uh I I have not seen the direct results
of what he was working on. That doesn't
mean they weren't there. It's just not
where I have been focused. I actually
worked on a a different bill this year
around crypto in the legislature where
New York really took the lead in
creating legal structures for many of
these companies through the limited
purpose trust and the bit license. Um
but now with new action at the federal
level um they have said you know there's
going to be federal licensing for these
trust companies for stable coins uh and
they will defer to states but only if
the states have detailed rules in
uh legislation or regulation in statute
or regulation and New York's done it
almost all by guidance and so I really
fought for a bill this year to
standardize what DFS had done in random
opinions put it into statutes so that
people know what the rules of the road
are and so that New York can keep its
regulatory structure. It passed the
Senate. Unfortunately, we didn't get it
done in the assembly. And now most of
the companies in New York are just
applying for the federal charter and we
as New Yorkers are going to lose our
ability to engage. So, um I think
regardless of your broad view on crypto,
finding ways to set rules of the road
that allow for innovation and allow for
us to have a say in how it develops is
something everyone should get behind.
>> Yeah. I'm looking at a map of the New
York 12th Congressional District. I
think one thing that really stands out,
it's not some weird snaky district. It's
just a real big square in the middle of
Manhattan. Like people who don't live
here might not appreciate this is like
this is prime real estate you're running
for. I argue I mean this is this might
be the highest GDP district in the world
or in the country or pretty close to it,
right?
>> Pretty close to it if not the one. Yes.
There's more Fortune 500 companies
headquartered there than I think at
least 37 states.
>> You're a few blocks away from me by the
Okay, I'm in these village. It looks
like it just cuts off a few blocks.
>> We'll fix it in redistricting.
[laughter]
>> Uh fix it in uh fix it in redistricting.
Um, it must be weird like, you know,
thinking about going back to the
beginning with like the tech industry
and criticizing you and like it must be
sort of weird that like you're a
politician who could actually like talk
in like gigaflops and stuff like that
because there's a lot of like anti- AI
people etc whatever or open standards
for digital encryption. It must be kind
of interesting that like okay here is
someone who wants to like hold the
industry to some legislative standards
who's frankly um
>> knowledgeable
>> informed. Yeah. Yeah. Knowledgeable.
Yeah. That must be sort of weird for
them.
>> I think it is. And I think it's why all
of their spending against me so far is
backfiring because people are like, "Oh
yeah, who is this guy who doesn't
understand tech who's doing uninformed
things?" And then it's like, "Wait, it's
the guy with software patents who worked
at Palunteer who has a masters in
computer science." It's like there is a
a disconnect there. I think, you know, I
have support from a lot of the people
that are like my age that work in the
tech industry, the ones actually
building it, um because they see the
power of what they're building and think
there should be some protections for it.
It's really those at the top uh who are,
I think, primarily focused on profits
that don't want government getting
involved at all.
>> I have a theoretical question going back
to the idea of hedge funds asking random
questions to see how you think. If you
had, I don't know, a a Bloomberg
terminal equivalent of government data,
>> what would you be most excited about
looking up or what correlation would you
be most [snorts] excited about finding?
>> That is a great question. I'm going to
stall at first by pointing out that I
actually do have a certification in the
Bloomberg terminal for my first job. So,
I'm I'm imagining this realistically. Um
uh so you know that all we do on the
terminal is just look at two lines that
correlate. [laughter] It's like I've
proved correlation.
Um I think uh ways of running more well
not maybe running more natural
experiments but looking at over time how
investments the government make pays
off. So, we only budget year by year.
>> And so, you have things like investing
in early child care that
>> boosts your immediate uh who can be
employed, but also like will help the
kids if you have universal prek, etc.
But that payback in the government if
you're just thinking fiscally is not
going to come for 20 30 years. And as we
budget yeartoyear, that is we think of
that as a cost. I think if we had more
ways of tying the effects previously in
budgets with what we're seeing now, it
would change radically where we would
invest.
>> Alex Boris, thank you so much for coming
on Oddlos. That was a lot of fun.
>> Thanks for having me. It must be kind of
weird uh like I you know I said it near
the end but an AI critic that knows
something about tech because there are a
lot of AI critics out there and I don't
get the impression a lot of them are
particularly actually wellinformed and
do not actually understand the sort of
strongest version of the argument that
uh they're running against. So, it's
interesting that this pack, this uh pro
artificial intelligence pack has decided
to target someone who I think a lot of
people would listen to. It's like
actually he knows what he's talking
about. He sounds pretty reasonable.
>> He's also the first one they're
targeting, right? So, it'll be
interesting to see who they go after.
>> Yeah.
>> After him. The other thing I was
thinking is if you think about one of
the threats to big tech business models,
it's it's always regulation, right? or
at least they say it's regulation. They
they seem to hate regulation.
>> So, or overregulation, I should say. So,
if you think about proposing some basic
safety guard rails and privacy,
>> that would seem like a good thing to me
in the sense that maybe you could
restore some of the trust or faith
between the general population and the
big tech companies and then you wouldn't
get these massive fights about
everything else. But that's probably a
long shot. It does seem like I have to
say that while a lot of what he said
made a lot of sense uh or sort of
sounded very reasonable, you know, I do
think that it's legitimate concern like
these issues aren't going to hobble
Deepseek now will deep does deepseeek
want to be in the app store and can US
laws enjoin them from being on the app
store? Sure. But they're not going to
hobble deepsek's development of a model.
And if they want to be a dominant player
in every country but the US and they're
completely unconstrained and the uh
American advanced labs are in or are
constrained. I do think that is
legitimate concern that the industry
might have. I also think it's a probably
a legitimate concern that um you don't
want to disincentivize the reporting of
safety issues that if a company gets
penalized for uh acknowledging that
something in their model like violated
some safety line, you do not want to
have the risk of like we're just going
to ignore this. And I think uh it's
reasonable that the industry might be
concerned that regulations could benefit
the incumbents. He argued against that.
He's like, "Oh, no, like this is not
going to affect like startups etc. But
there is always that risk that a
monetary fine is something that's very
easy for big companies to pay and more
marginal ones are more difficult. So,
you know, these are very tricky things.
But as you know, on the surface, more
than on the surface, an extremely
knowledgeable guy who what he says, none
of it sounds particularly ridiculous.
And I have to say, if I were running in
a primary that had like 25 people,
including like a Kennedy era, a Kennedy
heir, and some guy on Twitter who like
posts orange man bad a lot of times,
that sounds like a good way to stand out
from the crowd to be uh the AI
industry's number one target. You know,
I agree with you on the incumbent point,
but just in terms of US versus China, I
think people forget that China has its
own restrictions, quite quite severe
ones on censorship, right? And trolling,
I guess, every single communication in
the world um in case someone mentions um
a certain cartoon character seems like
that's that's a big regulatory barrier
>> as well. So, I don't know. I find the
the competition aspect of it overhyped
in some sense. But anyway, we could talk
about this for ages and a lot of these
issues are clearly like ongoing and no
one has the the solution yet. We're
trying to work that out.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracee Alaway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Alex Boris. He's Alex Boris. Follow our
producers Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman
Dashelbennet at Dashbot and Kaleb Brooks
at Kaleb Brooks.
>> And for more Abbots content, you can
check out our daily newsletter that is
at bloomberg.com/allbots.
>> And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlouds.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
please like the video or leave a comment
or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
[music]
>> [singing]